



Crypto Forum                                                    H. Davis
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Informational                                 D. Mouris
Expires: 24 April 2024                            University of Delaware
                                                               C. Patton
                                                              Cloudflare
                                                               P. Sarkar
                                                          Supra Research
                                                          N. G. Tsoutsos
                                                  University of Delaware
                                                         22 October 2023


                            The Mastic VDAF
                    draft-mouris-cfrg-mastic-latest

Abstract

   This document describes Mastic, a two-party VDAF for the following
   aggregation task: each client holds a bit string, and the collector
   wishes to count how many of these strings begin with a given prefix.
   Such a VDAF can be used to solve the private heavy hitters problem,
   where the goal is compute the subset of the strings that occur most
   frequently without learning which client uploaded which string.  This
   document describes different modes of operation for Mastic that
   support a variety of use cases and admit various performance and
   security trade-offs.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-mouris-cfrg-mastic/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Crypto Forum Research
   Group mailing list (mailto:cfrg@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=cfrg.  Subscribe
   at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/cfrg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/jimouris/draft-mouris-cfrg-mastic.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 24 April 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Preliminaries
     3.1.  Finite fields
     3.2.  XOF
     3.3.  FLP
     3.4.  Distributed Point Functions (DPF)
       3.4.1.  Incremental DPF (IDPF)
       3.4.2.  Verifiable DPF (VDPF)
       3.4.3.  Verifiable Incremental DPF (VIDPF)
   4.  Definition
     4.1.  Sharding
     4.2.  Preparation
     4.3.  Validity of Aggregation Parameters
     4.4.  Aggregation
     4.5.  Unsharding
   5.  Modes of Operation
     5.1.  Weighted Heavy-Hitters
     5.2.  Aggregation by Labels
     5.3.  Plain Heavy-Hitters with Proof Aggregation
     5.4.  Malicious Robustness for Plain Heavy-Hitters
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  References
     8.1.  Normative References
     8.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   [TO BE REMOVED BY RFC EDITOR: The source for this draft and the
   reference code can be found at https://github.com/jimouris/draft-
   mouris-cfrg-mastic.]

   The "private heavy hitters" problem is to recover the most popular
   measurements uploaded by clients with out learning the measurements
   themselves.  For example, a browser vendor might want to know which
   websites are most popular without learning which clients visited
   which websites.  This problem can be solved using a Verifiabile
   Distributed Aggregation Function, or VDAF [VDAF].  In particular, the
   Poplar1 VDAF described in Section 9 of [VDAF] describes how to
   distribute this computation amongst a small set of servers such that,
   as long as one server is honest, no individual measurement is
   observed in the clear.  At the same time, Poplar1 allows the servers
   to detect if a client has submitted an invalid measurement.

   This document describes the Mastic VDAF that can be used as a drop-in
   replacement for Poplar1, while offering improved performance and
   communication cost.  [CP: We'll need numbers to back this up.]  Based
   on the PLASMA protocol [MST23], the scheme's design is also somewhat
   simpler, requiring just one round for report preparation compared to
   Poplar1's two rounds.

   Mastic is also highly extensible.  Like Poplar1, Mastic's core
   functionality is to compute how many of the measurements -- here
   viewed as bit strings of some fixed length -- begin with a given
   prefix string.  (Over several rounds of aggregation, the prefix
   counting can be used to compute the heavy hitters as described in
   Section 8 of [VDAF].)  Mastic allows this basic counter data type to
   be generalized to support a wide variety of secure aggregation tasks.
   In particular, Mastic supports any data type for the output that can
   be expressed as a type for the Prio3 VDAF Section 7 of [VDAF].  For
   example, the counter could be replaced with a bounded weight (say,
   representing a dollar amount) such that the "heaviest weight"
   measurements are recovered.  We describe this mode of operation in
   Section 5.1.

   This generalization also allows Mastic to support another important
   use case.  A desirable feature for a secure aggregation systems is
   the ability to "drill down" on the data by splitting up the aggregate
   based on specific properties of the clients.  For example, a browser
   vendor may wish to partition aggregates by version (different
   versions of the browser may have different performance profiles) or
   geographic location.  We will call these properties "labels".

   Aggregating by labels requires representing the information in such a
   way that that the measurements submitted by clients with the same
   label are aggregated together.  Prio3 can be adapted for this
   purpose, but the communication cost would be linear in the number of
   possible distinct label, which becomes prohibitive if the label space
   is large.  Mastic encodes the label and measurement with constant
   communication overhead such that, for an arbitrary sequence of
   labels, the reports can be "queried" to reveal the aggregate for each
   label without learning the label or measurement of any client.  We
   describe this mode of operation in Section 5.2.

   Finally, two modes of operation for Mastic are described that admit
   useful performance and security trade-offs.

   First, we describe an optimization for plain heavy hitters that, in
   the best case, reduces the communication cost of preparation from
   linear in the number of reports to constant, leading to a dramatic
   improvement in performance compared to Poplar1.  This best-case
   behavior is observed when all clients behave honestly: if a fraction
   of the clients submit invalid reports, then additional rounds of
   communication are required in order isolate the invalid reports and
   remove them.  We describe this idea in detail in Section 5.3.

   Second, Section 5.4 describes an enhancement for plain heavy hitters
   that allows Mastic to achieve robustness in the presence of a
   malicious server.  Rather than two aggregation servers as in the
   previous modes, this mode of operation involves three aggregation
   servers, where every pair of servers communicate over a different
   channel.  [CP: Anything else to mention here?  Is the transform
   generic, i.e., apply to any 2-party VDAF, or are there tricks in
   [MST23] that we want to take advantage of for efficiency] While more
   complex to implement, this mode allows Mastic to achieve "full
   security", where both privacy and robustness hold in the honest
   majority setting.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Preliminaries

   Mastic makes use of three primitives described in the base VDAF
   specification [VDAF]: finie fields, eXtendable Output Functions
   (XOFs) and Fully Linear Proofs (FLPs).  It also makes use of a fourth
   primitive, which extends the security properties of Incremental
   Distributed Point Functions (IDPFs), also described in the base
   specification.  All three primitives are described below.

3.1.  Finite fields

   An implementation of the Field interface in Section 6.1 of [VDAF] is
   required.  This object implements arithmetic in a prime field with a
   suitable modulus.

      TODO: Describe the features of Field we need for Mastic.

3.2.  XOF

   An implementation of the Xof interface in Section 6.2 of [VDAF] is
   required.  This object implements an XOF that takes a short seed and
   some auxiliary data as input and outputs a string of any length
   required for the application.

      TODO: Describe the features of Xof we need for Mastic.

3.3.  FLP

   An implementation of the Flp interface in Section 7.1 of [VDAF] is
   required.  This object implements a zero-knowledge proof system used
   to verify that the mesaurement encoded by the client's report
   conforms to the data type required by the application.  The Client
   generates a proof that its measurement is valid and sends secret
   shares of this proof to each Aggregator.  Verification is split into
   two phases.  In the first phase, each Aggregator "queries" its share
   of the measurement and proof to obtain its "verifier share".  In the
   second phase, the Aggregators sum of the verifier shares and use the
   sum to decide if the input is valid.

      TODO: Describe in more detail the features of Flp we require for
      Mastic.

3.4.  Distributed Point Functions (DPF)

   Function secret sharing (FSS) allows secret sharing of the output of
   a function f() into additive shares, where each function share is
   represented by a separate key [GI14].  These keys enable their
   respective owners to efficiently generate an additive share of the
   function’s output f(x) for a given input x.  Distributed Point
   Functions (DPF) are a particular case of FSS where f() is a point
   function f_{alpha, beta}(x) = beta if x = a, or 0 otherwise.

3.4.1.  Incremental DPF (IDPF)

   An Incremental Distribute Point Function (IDPF, Section 8.1 of
   [VDAF]) is a secret sharing scheme for a special type of function
   known as an "incremental point function".  Such a function involves
   two parameters: alpha, a bit-string of some fixed size, which we
   denote by BITS; and beta, which in this document shall be represented
   by a fixed-length vector over a finite field Field.  The function is
   well-defined for any non-empty string of length less than or equal to
   BITS: on input of any prefix of alpha, the point function returns
   beta; otherwise, if the input is not a prefix of alpha, the output is
   Field.zeros(OUTPUT_LEN) (i.e., a length-OUTPUT_LEN vector of zeros).

   An IDPF has two main operations.  The first is the key-generation
   algorithm, which is run by the Client.  It takes as input alpha and
   beta and returns three values: two "key shares", one for each of two
   Aggregators; and the "public share", to be distributed to both
   Aggregators.  The second is the key-evaluation algorithm, run by each
   Aggregator.  It takes as input a candidate prefix string prefix, the
   public share, and the Aggregator's key share and returns the
   Aggregator's share of the point function parameterized by alpha and
   beta and evaluated at prefix.

   Shares of the IDPF outputs can be aggregated together across multiple
   reports.  This is used in Poplar1 (Section 8 of [VDAF]) to count how
   many input strings begin with a candidate prefix.  IDPFs are private
   in the sense that each Aggregators learning nothing about the
   underlying inputs beyond the value of this sum.  However, IDPFs on
   their own do not provide robustness: it is possible for a malicious
   to Client to fool the Aggregators into accepting malformed counter
   (i.e., a value other than 0 or 1).

3.4.2.  Verifiable DPF (VDPF)

   In the presence of a malicious client, standard DPFs and IDPFs suffer
   from malicious clients, who can completely corrupt the result by
   sending corrupt DPF keys.  Even worse, malicious clients can craft
   the keys and manipulate the statistics without the servers’
   knowledge.  Verifiable DPF (VDPF) [CP22] build on standard DPFs and
   ensure that a DPF key is well-formed using hashing-based techniques.

3.4.3.  Verifiable Incremental DPF (VIDPF)

   Mouris et al.  [MST23] describe an extension of IDPF and VDPF called
   Verifiable IDPF (VIDPF) that allows verifying that clients’ inputs
   are valid by relying on hashing while preserving the client’s input
   privacy.  VIDPF endows this basic scheme with two properties, both of
   are used in Mastic to achieve robustness:

   1.  *One-hot Verifiability:* The verifiability property of VIDPF
       ensures that if two proofs (proof_0 and proof_1) for a given
       level k are the same, then there is at most one value at that
       level (i.e., of length k) in the VIDPF tree whose evaluation
       outputs beta.

   2.  *Path Verifiability:* The One-hot Verifiability property alone is
       not sufficient to guarantee that the keys are well formed.  The
       Aggregators still need to verify that: a) the non-zero values
       beta of the Client are across a single path in the tree, and b)
       the value of the root node is correctly propagated down the VIDPF
       tree.  For example, if the root value is beta, then there is only
       a single path from root to the leaves with beta values.

      TODO(cjpatton) Define syntax and give overview of design.  Point
      to reference implementation for details.

4.  Definition

   TODO(cjpatton) overview

4.1.  Sharding

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to reference implementation

4.2.  Preparation

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to reference implementation

4.3.  Validity of Aggregation Parameters

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to reference implementation

4.4.  Aggregation

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to reference implementation

4.5.  Unsharding

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to reference implementation

5.  Modes of Operation

5.1.  Weighted Heavy-Hitters

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to example

5.2.  Aggregation by Labels

   TODO(cjpatton) high-level, point to example

5.3.  Plain Heavy-Hitters with Proof Aggregation

   TODO(jimouris)

5.4.  Malicious Robustness for Plain Heavy-Hitters

   TODO(jimouris)

6.  Security Considerations

   TODO

7.  IANA Considerations

   TODO

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [VDAF]     Barnes, R., Cook, D., Patton, C., and P. Schoppmann,
              "Verifiable Distributed Aggregation Functions", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf-07, 31
              August 2023, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              irtf-cfrg-vdaf-07>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [BBCGGI21] Boneh, D., Boyle, E., Corrigan-Gibbs, H., Gilboa, N., and
              Y. Ishai, "Lightweight Techniques for Private Heavy
              Hitters", IEEE S&P 2021 , 2021, <https://ia.cr/2021/017>.

   [CP22]     Leo de Castro and Anitgoni Polychroniadou, "Lightweight,
              Maliciously Secure Verifiable Function Secret Sharing",
              EUROCRYPT 2022 , 2022,
              <https://iacr.org/cryptodb/data/paper.php?pubkey=31935>.

   [DPRS23]   Davis, H., Patton, C., Rosulek, M., and P. Schoppmann,
              "Verifiable Distributed Aggregation Functions",
              Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PoPETs) ,
              2023, <https://doi.org/10.56553/popets-2023-0126>.

   [GI14]     Gilboa, N. and Y. Ishai, "Distributed Point Functions and
              Their Applications", EUROCRYPT 2014 , 2014,
              <https://link.springer.com/
              chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-55220-5_35>.

   [MST23]    Dimitris Mouris, Pratik Sarkar, and Nektarios Georgios
              Tsoutsos, "PLASMA: Private, Lightweight Aggregated
              Statistics against Malicious Adversaries", 2023,
              <https://ia.cr/2023/080>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO

Authors' Addresses

   Hannah Davis
   Email: hannahedavis@protonmail.com


   Dimitris Mouris
   University of Delaware
   Email: jimouris@udel.edu


   Christopher Patton
   Cloudflare
   Email: chrispatton+ietf@gmail.com


   Pratik Sarkar
   Supra Research
   Email: pratik93@bu.edu


   Nektarios G. Tsoutsos
   University of Delaware
   Email: tsoutsos@udel.edu
